# Chapter 1 - Getting Started

This chapter introduces most of the basic elements of C++: types, variables, expressions, statements, and functions.
Along the way, we will briefly explain how to compile and execute a program.

## Writing a Simple C++ Program

Every C++ program contains one or more **function**, one of which must be named **`main`**. The operating system runs
a C++ program by calling `main`. 

```
int main()
{
	return 0;
}
```

A function definition has four elements: a **return type**, a **function name**, a (possibly empty) **parameter list**
enclosed in parentheses, and a **function body**.

When a `return` statement includes a value, the value returned must have a type that is compatible with the return type
of the function. 

Note the semicolon(;) at the end of the `return` statement. Semicolons mark the end of most statements in C++. They are
easy to overlook but, when forgotten, can lead to mysterious compiler error messages.

> **KEY CONCEPT: TYPES**

> **Types are one of the most fundamental concepts in programming and a concept that we will come back to over and over
in this Primer. A type defines both the contents of a data element and the operations that are possible on those data.**

> **The data our programs manipulate are stored in variables and every variable has a type. When the type of a variable
named `v` is `T`, we often say that "`v` has type `T`" or, interchangeably, that "`v` is a `T`."**

## A First Look at Input/Output

The C++ language does not define any statements to do input or output (IO). Instead, C++ includes an extensive **standard
library** that provides IO.

Most of the examples in this book use the **``*iostream* library. Fundamental to the `iostream` library are two types named
**`istream`** and **`ostream`**, which represent input and output streams. A stream is a sequence of characters read from
or written to an IO device.

**Standard Input and Output Objects**

The library defines four IO objects. To handle input, we use an object of type `istream` named **`cin`**. This object is also
referred to as the **standard input**. For output, we use an `ostream` object named **`cout`**. This object is also known as 
the **standard output**. The library also defines two other `ostream` objects, named **`cerr`** and **`clog`**. We typically
use `cerr`, referred to as the **standard error**, for warning and error messages and `clog` for general information about
the execution of the program.

**A Program That Uses the IO Library**

Using the IO library, we can extend our `main` program to prompt the user to give us two numbers and then print their sum:

```
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
	std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
	int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
	std::cin >> v1 >> v2;
	std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2
		<< " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

The first line of our program

```
#include <iostream>
```

tells the complier that we want to use the `iostream` library. The name inside angle brackets refers to a **header**.
Every program that uses a library facility must include its associated header. The `#include` directive must be written
on a single line - the name of the header and the `#include` must appear on the same line. In general, `#include` directives
must appear outside any function. Typcially, we put all the `#include` directives for a program at the beginning of the 
source file.

**Writing to a Stream**

The first statement in the body of `main` executes an **expression**. In C++ an expression yields a result and is composed
of one or more operands and (usually) an operator. The expressions in this statement use the output operator (the `<<` **operator**) to print a message on the standard output:

```
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
```

The `<<` operator takes two operands: The left-hand operand must be an `ostream` object; the right-hand operand is a value
to print. The operator writes the given value on the given `ostream`. The result of the output operator is its left-hand
operand. 

Our output statement used the `<<` operator twice. Because the operator returns its left-hand operand, the result of the 
first operator becomes the left-hand operand of the second. Thus, out expression is equivalent to

```
(std::cout << "Enter two numbers:") << std::endl;
```

Each operator in the chain has the same object as its left-hand operand, in this case `std::cout`.

```
std::cout << "Enter two numbers:";
std::cout << std::endl;
```

The first output operator prints a message to the user. That message is a **string literal**, which is a sequence of 
characters enclosed in double quotation marks. The text between the quotation marks is printed to the standard output.

The second operator prints `endl`, which is a special value called a **manipulator**. Writing `endl` has the effect of
ending the current line and flushing the **buffer** associated with that device. Flushing the buffer ensures that all
the output the program has generated so far is actually written to the output stream, rather than sitting in memory waiting
to be written.

**Using Names from the Standaard Library**

The prefix `std::` indicates that the names `cout` and `endl` are defined inside the **namespace** named **`std`**.
Namespaces allow us to avoid inadvertent collisions between the names we define and uses of those same names inside a
library. All the names defined by the standard library are in the `std` namespace.

One side effect of the library's use of a namespace is that when we use a name from the library, we must say explicitly
that we want to use the name from the `std` namespace. Writing `std::cout` uses the scope operator (**`::` operator**) to
say that we want to use the name `cout` that is defined in the namespace `std`.

**Reading from a Stream**

We start by defining two ***variables*** named `v1` and `v2` to hold the input:

```
int v1 = 0, v2 = 0;
```

We define these variables as type `int`, which is a built-in type representing integers. We also ***initialize*** them
to 0.

The next statement

```
std::cin >> v1 >> v2;
```

reads the input. The input operator (**`>>` operator**) takes an `istream` as its left-hand operand and an object as 
its right-hand operand. It reads data from the given `istream` and stores what was read in the given object.

```
(std::cin >> v1) >> v2;
```

Our input operation reads two values from `std::cin`, storing the first in `v1` and the second in `v2`. In other words,
our input operation executes as

```
std::cin >> v1;
std::cin >> v2;
```

**Completing the Program**

What remains is to print our result:

```
std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2
		<< " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
```

This statement prints each of its operands on the standard output. What is interesting in this example is that the operands
are not all the same kinds of values. The library defines versions of the input and output operators that handle operands
of each of these differing types.

## A Word about Comments

Comments help the human readers of our programs. They are typically used to summarize an algorithm, identify the purpose
of a variable, or clarify an otherwise obscure segment of code.

**Kinds of Comments in C++**

There are two kinds of comments in C++: single-line and paired. A single-line comment starts with a double slash (`//`) and 
ends with a newline. 

The other kind of comment uses two delimiters (`/*` and `*/`) that are inherited from C. These comments can include anything
that is not a `*/`, including newlines. 

Comment pairs generally are used for multiline explanations, whereas double-slash comments tend to be used for half-line 
and single-line remarks:

```
#include <iostream>
/*
* Simple main function:
* Read two numbers and write their sum
*/
int main()
{
	// prompt user to enter two numbers
	std::cout << "Enter two numbers:" << std::endl;
	int v1 = 0, v2 = 0; // variables to hold the input we read
	std::cin >> v1 >> v2; // read input
	std::cout << "The sum of " << v1 << " and " << v2
	<< " is " << v1 + v2 << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

**Comment Pairs Do Not Nest**

As a result, one comment pair cannot appear inside another. We often need to comment out a block of code during debugging. 
Because that code might contain nested comment pairs, the best way to comment a block of code is to insert single-line 
comments at the beginning of each line in the section we want to ignore:

```
// /*
// * everything inside a single-line comment is ignored
// * including nested comment pairs
// */
```

## Flow of Control

### The `while` Statement

A **`while` statement** repeatedly executes a section of code so long as a given condition
is true. We can use a while to write a program to sum the numbers from 1
through 10 inclusive as follows:

```
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
	int sum = 0, val = 1;
	// keep executing the while as long as val in less than or equal to 10
	while (val <= 10) {
		sum += val; // assigns sum + val to sum
		++val; // add 1 to val
	}
	std::cout << "Sum of 1 to 10 inclusive is " << sum << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

The new part of this program is the while statement. A while has the form

```
while (condition)
	statement
```

A `while` executes by (alternately) testing the *condition* and executing the associated
*statement* until the *condition* is false. A **condition** is an expression that yields a
result that is either true or false. So long as *condition* is true, *statement* is executed.
After executing *statement*, *condition* is tested again. If *condition* is again true, then
*statement* is again executed. The `while` continues, alternately testing the *condition*
and executing *statement* until the *condition* is false.

The first statement in this block uses the compound assignment operator (the **+= operator**).
This operator adds its right-hand operand to its left-hand operand and stores the
result in the left-hand operand. It has essentially the same effect as writing an
addition and an **assignment**:

```
sum = sum + val; // assign sum + val to sum
```

Thus, the first statement in the block adds the value of `val` to the current value of
`sum` and stores the result back into `sum`.

The next statement

```
++val; // add 1 to val
```

uses the prefix increment operator (the **++ operator**). The increment operator adds
`1` to its operand. Writing `++val` is the same as writing `val = val + 1`.

After executing the `while` body, the loop evaluates the condition again.

Once `val` is greater than 10, the programfalls out of the `while` loop and continues
execution with the statement following the `while`. In this case, that statement
prints our output, followed by the `return`, which completes our `main` program.

### The `for` Statement













































 


















































