# Chapter 2 - Variables and Basic Types

Types are fundamental to any program: They tell us what our data
mean and what operations we can perform on those data.

C++ defines several primitive types (characters, integers, floating-point numbers, etc.)
and provides mechanisms that let us define our own data types. This
chapter covers the built-in types and begins our coverage of how C++ supports more complicated types.


## Primitive Built-in Types

C++ defines a set of primitive types that include the **arithmetic types** and a special
type named **`void`**. The arithmetic types represent characters, integers, boolean
values, and floating-point numbers. The `void` type has no associated values and
can be used in only a few circumstances, most commonly as the return type for
functions that do not return a value.

### Arithmetic Types

The arithmetic types are divided into two categories: **integral types** (which include
character and boolean types) and floating-point types.

The `bool` type represents the truth values `true` and `false`.

The basic character type is `char`. A `char` is guaranteed to be big enough to
hold numeric values corresponding to the characters in the machine’s basic character
set. That is, a `char` is the same size as a single machine byte.

The remaining character types—`wchar_t`, `char16_t`, and `char32_t`—are
used for extended character sets. The `wchar_t` type is guaranteed to be large
enough to hold any character in the machine’s largest extended character set. The
types `char16_t` and `char32_t` are intended for Unicode characters.

The remaining integral types represent integer values of (potentially) different
sizes. The language guarantees that an `int` will be at least as large as `short`, a
`long` at least as large as an `int`, and `long long` at least as large as `long`.

The floating-point types represent single-, double-, and extended-precision values.
The standard specifies a minimum number of significant digits. Most compilers
provide more precision than the specified minimum.

**Signed and Unsigned Types**

Except for `bool` and the extended character types, the integral typesmay be **signed**
or **unsigned**. A signed type represents negative or positive numbers (including
zero); an unsigned type represents only values greater than or equal to zero.

The types `int`, `short`, `long`, and `long long` are all signed. We obtain the
corresponding unsigned type by adding unsigned to the type, such as `unsigned
long`.

> **ADVICE: DECIDING WHICH TYPE TO USE**

> **Most programmers can (and should) ignore these complexities by restricting the types they
use. A few rules of thumb can be useful in deciding which type to use:**

> * **Use an unsigned type when you know that the values cannot be negative.**

> * **Use `int` for integer arithmetic. `short` is usually too small and, in practice, `long`
often has the same size as `int`. If your data values are larger than the minimum
guaranteed size of an `int`, then use `long long`.**

> * **Do not use plain `char` or `bool` in arithmetic expressions. Use them *only* to hold
characters or truth values. Computations using `char` are especially problematic
because `char` is `signed` on some machines and `unsigned` on others. If you
need a tiny integer, explicitly specify either `signed char` or `unsigned char`.**

> * **Use `double` for floating-point computations; `float` usually does not have
enough precision, and the cost of double-precision calculations versus singleprecision
is negligible. In fact, on some machines, double-precision operations
are faster than single. The precision offered by `long double` usually is unnecessary
and often entails considerable run-time cost.**

### Type Conversions

Among the operations that many types support is the ability to **convert** objects of the given type to other, related types.
Type conversions happen automatically when we use an object of one type where an object of another type is expected.

When we assign one arithmetic type to another:

```
bool b = 42; // b is true
int i = b; // i has value 1
i = 3.14; // i has value 3
double pi = i; // pi has value 3.0
unsigned char c = -1; // assuming 8-bit chars, c has value 255
signed char c2 = 256; // assuming 8-bit chars, the value of c2 is undefined
```

what happens depends on the range of the values that the types permit:

* When we assign one of the nonbool arithmetic types to a `bool` object, the
result is `false` if the value is 0 and `true` otherwise.

* When we assign a `bool` to one of the other arithmetic types, the resulting
value is 1 if the `bool` is `true` and 0 if the `bool` is `false`.

* When we assign a floating-point value to an object of integral type, the value
is truncated. The value that is stored is the part before the decimal point.

* When we assign an integral value to an object of floating-point type, the fractional
part is zero. Precision may be lost if the integer has more bits than the
floating-point object can accommodate.

* If we assign an out-of-range value to an object of unsigned type, the result is
the remainder of the value modulo the number of values the target type can
hold.

* If we assign an out-of-range value to an object of signed type, the result is
**undefined**. The program might appear to work, it might crash, or it might
produce garbage values.

**Experssions Involving Unsigned Types**

For example, if we use both `unsigned` and `int` values in an arithmetic expression, the
`int` value ordinarily is converted to `unsigned`. Converting an `int` to `unsigned`
executes the same way as if we assigned the `int` to an `unsigned`:

```
unsigned u = 10;
int i = -42;
std::cout << i + i << std::endl; // prints -84
std::cout << u + i << std::endl; // if 32-bit ints, prints 4294967264
```

Converting a negative number to `unsigned` behaves exactly as ifwe had attempted to assign that negative value to an 
`unsigned` object. The value “wraps around” as described above.

Regardless of whether one or both operands are unsigned, if we subtract a
value from an unsigned, we must be sure that the result cannot be negative:

```
unsigned u1 = 42, u2 = 10;
std::cout << u1 - u2 << std::endl; // ok: result is 32
std::cout << u2 - u1 << std::endl; // ok: but the result will wrap around
```

> **CAUTION: DON’T MIX SIGNED AND UNSIGNED TYPES**

> **Expressions that mix signed and unsigned values can yield surprising results when
the signed value is negative. It is essential to remember that signed values are automatically
converted to unsigned.**

### Literals

A value, such as 42, is known as a **literal** because its value self-evident. Every
literal has a type. The form and value of a literal determine its type.

**Integer and Floating-Point Literals**

We can write an integer literal using decimal, octal, or hexadecimal notation. Integer
literals that begin with `0` (zero) are interpreted as octal. Those that begin with
either `0x` or `0X` are interpreted as hexadecimal. For example, we can write the
value `20` in any of the following three ways:

```
20 /* decimal */ 024 /* octal */ 0x14 /* hexadecimal */
```

The type of an integer literal depends on its value and notation. By default, decimal
literals are signed whereas octal and hexadecimal literals can be either signed
or unsigned types. A decimal literal has the smallest type of `int`, `long`, or `long long` 
(i.e., the first type in this list) in which the literal’s value fits. Octal and hexadecimal
literals have the smallest type of `int`, `unsigned int`, `long`, `unsigned long`, `long long`, 
or `unsigned long long` in which the literal’s value fits. It is
an error to use a literal that is too large to fit in the largest related type. There are
no literals of type `short`.

Although integer literals may be stored in signed types, technically speaking,
the value of a decimal literal is never a negative number. The minus sign is an operator that negates 
the value of its (literal) operand.

Floating-point literals include either a decimal point or an exponent specified
using scientific notation. Using scientific notation, the exponent is indicated by
either E or e:

```
3.14159 3.14159E0 0. 0e0 .001
```

**Character and Character String Literals**

A character enclosed within single quotes is a literal of type `char`. Zero ormore
characters enclosed in double quotation marks is a string literal:

```
’a’ // character literal
"Hello World!" // string literal
```

Two string literals that appear adjacent to one another and that are separated
only by spaces, tabs, or newlines are concatenated into a single literal. We use this
form of literal when we need to write a literal that would otherwise be too large to
fit comfortably on a single line:

```
// multiline string literal
std::cout << "a really, really long string literal "
	"that spans two lines" << std::endl;
```

**Escape Sequences**

Some characters, such as backspace or control characters, have no visible image.
Such characters are **nonprintable**. Other characters (single and double quotation
marks, question mark, and backslash) have special meaning in the language. Our
programs cannot use any of these characters directly. Instead, we use an **escape sequence**
to represent such characters. An escape sequence begins with a backslash.
The language defines several escape sequences:

```
newline \n horizontal tab \t alert (bell) \a
vertical tab \v backspace \b double quote \"
backslash \\ question mark \? single quote \’
carriage return \r formfeed \f
```

**Boolean and Pointer Literals**

The words `true` and `false` are literals of type `bool`:

```
bool test = false;
```

## Variables

A *variable* provides us with named storage that our programs can manipulate.
Each variable in C++ has a type. The type determines the size and layout of the
variable’s memory, the range of values that can be stored within that memory, and
the set of operations that can be applied to the variable.

### Variable Definitions

A simple variable definition consists of a **type specifier**, followed by a list of one or
more variable names separated by commas, and ends with a semicolon. Each name
in the list has the type defined by the type specifier. A definition may (optionally)
provide an initial value for one or more of the names it defines:

```
int sum = 0, value, // sum, value, and units_sold have type int
units_sold = 0; // sum and units_sold have initial value 0
Sales_item item; // item has type Sales_item
// string is a library type, representing a variable-length sequence of characters
std::string book("0-201-78345-X"); // book initialized from string literal
```

**Initializer**

An object that is **initialized** gets the specified value at the moment it is created.
The values used to initialize a variable can be arbitrarily complicated expressions.
When a definition defines two or more variables, the name of each object becomes
visible immediately. Thus, it is possible to initialize a variable to the value of one
defined earlier in the same definition.

```
// ok: price is defined and initialized before it is used to initialize discount
double price = 109.99, discount = price * 0.16;
// ok: call applyDiscount and use the return value to initialize salePrice
double salePrice = applyDiscount(price, discount);
```

> Initialization is not assignment. Initialization happens when a variable
is given a value when it is created. Assignment obliterates an object’s
current value and replaces that value with a new one.

**List Initialization**

One way in which initialization is a complicated topic is that the language defines
several different forms of initialization.

```
int units_sold = 0;
int units_sold = {0};
int units_sold{0};
int units_sold(0);
```

The generalized use of curly braces for initialization was introduced as part of
the new standard, this form of initialization is referred to as **list initialization**.

**Default Initialization**

When we define a variable without an initializer, the variable is **default initialized**.
Such variables are given the “default” value.

> Uninitialized objects of built-in type defined inside a function body
have undefined value. Objects of class type that we do not explicitly
initialize have a value that is defined by the class.

> **CAUTION: UNINITIALIZED VARIABLES CAUSE RUN-TIME PROBLEMS**

> **We recommend initializing every object of built-in type. It is not always
necessary, but it is easier and safer to provide an initializer until you can
be certain it is safe to omit the initializer.**

### Variable Declarations and Definitions

To support separate compilation, C++ distinguishes between declarations and
definitions. A **declaration** makes a name known to the program. A file that wants
to use a name defined elsewhere includes a declaration for that name. A **definition**
creates the associated entity.

To obtain a declaration that is not also a definition, we add the `extern` keyword
and may not provide an explicit initializer:

```
extern int i; // declares but does not define i
int j; // declares and defines j
```

Any declaration that includes an explicit initializer is a definition. We can provide
an initializer on a variable defined as `extern`, but doing so overrides the
extern. An `extern` that has an initializer is a definition:

```
extern double pi = 3.1416; // definition
```

> Variables must be defined exactly once but can be declared many times.

### Identifiers

***Identifiers*** in C++ can be composed of letters, digits, and the underscore character.
The language imposes no limit on name length. Identifiersmust begin with either a
letter or an underscore. Identifiers are case-sensitive; upper- and lowercase letters
are distinct:

```
// defines four different int variables
int somename, someName, SomeName, SOMENAME;
```

**Conventions for Variable Names**

There are a number of generally accepted conventions for naming variables. Following
these conventions can improve the readability of a program.

* An identifier should give some indication of its meaning.

* Variable names normally are lowercase—`index`, not `Index` or `INDEX`.

* Like `Sales_item`, classes we define usually begin with an uppercase letter.

* Identifiers with multiple words should visually distinguish each word, for
example, `student_loan` or `studentLoan`, not `studentloan`.

### Scope of a Name

A **scope** is a part of the program in which a name has a particular meaning.
Most scopes in C++ are delimited by curly braces.

The same name can refer to different entities in different scopes. Names are
visible from the point where they are declared until the end of the scope in which
the declaration appears.

```
#include <iostream>
int main()
{
	int sum = 0;
	// sum values from1 through 10 inclusive
	for (int val = 1; val <= 10; ++val)
		sum += val; // equivalent to sum = sum + val
	std::cout << "Sum of 1 to 10 inclusive is "
		<< sum << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

The name `main` is defined outside any curly braces. The name `main`—like most
names defined outside a function—has **global scope**. Once declared, names at the
global scope are accessible throughout the program. The name `sum` is defined
within the scope of the block that is the body of the `main` function. It is accessible
from its point of declaration throughout the rest of the `main` function but not outside
of it. The variable `sum` has **block scope**. The name `val` is defined in the scope
of the `for` statement. It can be used in that statement but not elsewhere in `main`.

**Nested Scopes**

Scopes can contain other scopes. The contained (or nested) scope is referred to as
an **inner scope**, the containing scope is the **outer scope**.

Once a name has been declared in a scope, that name can be used by scopes
nested inside that scope. Names declared in the outer scope can also be redefined
in an inner scope:

```
#include <iostream>
// Program for illustration purposes only: It is bad style for a function
// to use a global variable and also define a local variable with the same name
int reused = 42; // reused has global scope
int main()
{
	int unique = 0; // unique has block scope
	// output #1: uses global reused; prints 42 0
	std::cout << reused << " " << unique << std::endl;
	int reused = 0; // new, local object named reused hides global reused
	// output #2: uses local reused; prints0 0
	std::cout << reused << " " << unique << std::endl;
	// output #3: explicitly requests the global reused; prints 42 0
	std::cout << ::reused << " " << unique << std::endl;
	return 0;
}
```

> It is almost always a bad idea to define a local variable with the same
name as a global variable that the function uses or might use.

## Compound Types

A **compound type** is a type that is defined in terms of another type. C++ has
several compound types, two of which—references and pointers.

More generally, a declaration is a **base type**
followed by a list of **declarators**. Each declarator names a variable and gives the
variable a type that is related to the base type.

### References

A reference defines an alternative name for an object. A reference type “refers
to” another type. We define a reference type by writing a declarator of the form
`&d`, where `d` is the name being declared:

```
int ival = 1024;
int &refVal = ival; // refVal refers to (is another name for) ival
int &refVal2; // error: a reference must be initialized
```

Ordinarily, when we initialize a variable, the value of the initializer is copied into
the object we are creating. When we define a reference, instead of copying the initializer’s
value, we **bind** the reference to its initializer. Once initialized, a reference
remains bound to its initial object. There is no way to rebind a reference to refer to
a different object. Because there is no way to rebind a reference, references *must* be
initialized.


**A Reference Is an Alias**

> A reference is not an object. Instead, a reference is *just another name for
an already existing object*.

After a reference has been defined, *all* operations on that reference are actually
operations on the object to which the reference is bound:

```
refVal = 2; // assigns 2 to the object to which refVal refers, i.e., to ival
int ii = refVal; // same as ii = ival
```

**Reference Definitions**

We can define multiple references in a single definition. Each identifier that is a
reference must be preceded by the `&` symbol:

```
int i = 1024, i2 = 2048; // i and i2 are both ints
int &r = i, r2 = i2; // r is a reference bound to i; r2 is an int
int i3 = 1024, &ri = i3; // i3 is an int; ri is a reference bound to i3
int &r3 = i3, &r4 = i2; // both r3 and r4 are references
```

With two exceptions, the type of a reference and the object to which the reference refersmust match exactly.
Moreover, referencemay be bound only to an object, not to a literal or to the result of a more general expression:

```
int &refVal4 = 10; // error: initializer must be an object
double dval = 3.14;
int &refVal5 = dval; // error: initializer must be an int object
```

### Pointers

A **pointer** is a compound type that “points to” another type. Like references, pointers
are used for indirect access to other objects. Unlike a reference, a pointer is an
object in its own right. Pointers can be assigned and copied; a single pointer can
point to several different objects over its lifetime. Unlike a reference, a pointer
need not be initialized at the time it is defined. Like other built-in types, pointers
defined at block scope have undefined value if they are not initialized.

We define a pointer type by writing a declarator of the form `*d`, where `d` is the
name being defined. The `*` must be repeated for each pointer variable:

```
int *ip1, *ip2; // both ip1 and ip2 are pointers to int
double dp, *dp2; // dp2 is a pointer to double; dp is a double
```

**Taking the Address of an Object**

A pointer holds the address of another object. We get the address of an object by
usin the address-of operator (the **& operator**):

```
int ival = 42;
int *p = &ival; // p holds the address of ival; p is a pointer to ival
```

With two exceptions, the types of the pointer and the object to which it points must match:

```
double dval;
double *pd = &dval; // ok: initializer is the address of a double
double *pd2 = pd; // ok: initializer is a pointer to double
int *pi = pd; // error: types of pi and pd differ
pi = &dval; // error: assigning the address of a double to a pointer to int
```

The types must match because the type of the pointer is used to infer the type of
the object to which the pointer points. If a pointer addressed an object of another
type, operations performed on the underlying object would fail.

**Pointer Value**

The value (i.e., the address) stored in a pointer can be in one of four states:

1. It can point to an object.

2. It can point to the location just immediately past the end of an object.

3. It can be a null pointer, indicating that it is not bound to any object.

4. It can be invalid; values other than the preceding three are invalid.

**Using a Pointer to Access an Object**

When a pointer points to an object, we can use the dereference operator (the *****
**operator**) to access that object:

```
int ival = 42;
int *p = &ival; // p holds the address of ival; p is a pointer to ival
cout << *p; // * yields the object to which p points; prints 42
```

Dereferencing a pointer yields the object to which the pointer points. We can assign
to that object by assigning to the result of the dereference:

```
*p = 0; // * yields the object; we assign a new value to ival through p
cout << *p; // prints 0
```

When we assign to `*p`, we are assigning to the object to which `p` points.

> **KEY CONCEPT: SOME SYMBOLS HAVE MULTIPLE MEANINGS**

> 
**Some symbols, such as & and *, are used as both an operator in an expression and
as part of a declaration. The context in which a symbol is used determines what the
symbol means:**

> 
```
int i = 42;
int &r = i; // & follows a type and is part of a declaration; r is a reference
int *p; // * follows a type and is part of a declaration; p is a pointer
p = &i; // & is used in an expression as the address-of operator
*p = i; // * is used in an expression as the dereference operator
int &r2 = *p; // & is part of the declaration; * is the dereference operator
```

> **In declarations, & and * are used to form compound types. In expressions, these same
symbols are used to denote an operator. Because the same symbol is used with very
different meanings, it can be helpful to ignore appearances and think of them as if
they were different symbols.**

**Null Pointers**

A **null pointer** does not point to any object. Code can check whether a pointer is
null before attempting to use it. There are several ways to obtain a null pointer:

```
int *p1 = nullptr; // equivalent to int *p1 = 0;
int *p2 = 0; // directly initializes p2 from the literal constant 0
// must #include cstdlib
int *p3 = NULL; // equivalent to int *p3 = 0;
```

The most direct approach is to initialize the pointer using the literal **`nullptr`**,
which was introduced by the new standard.

What’s useful to know now is that the preprocessor is a program that runs before the
compiler. Preprocessor variables are managed by the preprocessor, and are not
part of the `std` namespace. As a result, we refer to them directly without the
`std::` prefix.

It is illegal to assign an `int` variable to a pointer, even if the variable’s value
happens to be 0.

```
int zero = 0;
pi = zero; // error: cannot assign an int to a pointer
```

> **ADVICE: INITIALIZE ALL POINTERS**

> 
**Our recommendation to initialize all variables is particularly important for pointers.
If possible, define a pointer only after the object to which it should point has
been defined. If there is no object to bind to a pointer, then initialize the pointer to
`nullptr` or zero. That way, the program can detect that the pointer does not point to
an object.**

**Assignment and Pointers**

The most important is that a reference is not an object. Once we have defined a reference, there is no way to make that
reference refer to a different object. When we use a reference, we always get the object to which the reference was initially bound.

As with any other (nonreference) variable, when we assign to a pointer, we give the
pointer itself a new value. Assignment makes the pointer point to a different object:

```
int i = 42;
int *pi = 0; // pi is initialized but addresses no object
int *pi2 = &i; // pi2 initialized to hold the address of i
int *pi3; // if pi3 is defined inside a block, pi3 is uninitialized
pi3 = pi2; // pi3 and pi2 address the same object, e.g., i
pi2 = 0; // pi2 now addresses no object
```

The important thing to keep in mind is that
assignment changes its left-hand operand. When we write

```
pi = &ival; // value in pi is changed; pi now points to ival
```

**Other Pointer Operations**

So long as the pointer has a valid value, we can use a pointer in a condition. Just
as when we use an arithmetic value in a condition, if the pointer is
`0`, then the condition is `false`:

```
int ival = 1024;
int *pi = 0; // pi is a valid, null pointer
int *pi2 = &ival; // pi2 is a valid pointer that holds the address of ival
if (pi) // pi has value 0, so condition evaluates as false
// . . .
if (pi2) // pi2 points to ival, so it is not 0; the condition evaluates as true
// . . .
```

Any nonzero pointer evaluates as `true`.

Given two valid pointers of the same type, we can compare them using the
equality (`==`) or inequality (`!=`) operators. The result of these operators has type
`bool`. Two pointers are equal if they hold the same address and unequal otherwise.
Two pointers hold the same address (i.e., are equal) if they are both null, if
they address the same object, or if they are both pointers one past the same object.
Note that it is possible for a pointer to an object and a pointer one past the end of
a different object to hold the same address. Such pointers will compare equal.

**`void*` Pointers**

The type **`void*`** is a special pointer type that can hold the address of any object.
Like any other pointer, a `void*` pointer holds an address, but the type of the object
at that address is unknown:

```
double obj = 3.14, *pd = &obj;
// ok: void* can hold the address value of any data pointer type
void *pv = &obj; // obj can be an object of any type
pv = pd; // pv can hold a pointer to any type
```

There are only a limited number of things we can do with a `void*` pointer: We can
compare it to another pointer, we can pass it to or return it from a function, and
we can assign it to another `void*` pointer. We cannot use a `void*` to operate on
the object it addresses—we don’t know that object’s type, and the type determines
what operations we can perform on the object.

Generally, we use a `void*` pointer to deal with memory as memory, rather
than using the pointer to access the object stored in thatmemory.

### Understanding Compound Type Declarations

As we’ve seen, a variable definition consists of a base type and a list of declarators.
Each declarator can relate its variable to the base type differently from the other
declarators in the same definition. Thus, a single definition might define variables
of different types:

```
// i is an int; p is a pointer to int; r is a reference to int
int i = 1024, *p = &i, &r = i;
```

**Defining Multiple Variables**

There are two common styles used to define multiple variables with pointer or
reference type. The first places the type modifier adjacent to the identifier:

```
int *p1, *p2; // both p1 and p2 are pointers to int
```

This style emphasizes that the variable has the indicated compound type.

The second places the type modifier with the type but defines only one variable
per statement:

```
int* p1; // p1 is a pointer to int
int* p2; // p2 is a pointer to int
```

This style emphasizes that the declaration defines a compound type.

**Pointers to Pointers**

In general, there are no limits to how many type modifiers can be applied to a
declarator. When there is more than one modifier, they combine in ways that are
logical but not always obvious.

We indicate each pointer level by its own `*`. That is, we write `**` for a pointer
to a pointer, `***` for a pointer to a pointer to a pointer, and so on:

```
int ival = 1024;
int *pi = &ival; // pi points to an int
int **ppi = &pi; // ppi points to a pointer to an int
```




























































